Testing for pre-trends in DiD and event studies (#1226)
tilburgsciencehub/website: content/topics/Analyze/causal-inference/did/pretrends.md

---

> title: "Testing for pre-trends in DiD and event studies"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Testing for Pre-trends in DiD and Event Studies"

```

description: "How to test for the parallel trends assumption in DiD and event study designs and the challenges with these tests"
keywords: "DiD, event study, causal, inference, parallel trends, regression, R, pre-trends, bias, testing"
draft: false
weight: 5
author: "Victor Arutyunov"
aliases:
  - /did-pretrends
  - /eventstudy-pretrends
  - /pretrends-testing
---

## Introduction

> [Difference-in-differences (DiD)](/canonical-DiD) and event study designs are among the most popular quasi-experimental approaches used in empirical research in economics and the social sciences. They rely on the comparison of two groups – one exposed to treatment (the treatment group) and one not (the control group) – before and after the treatment is implemented. 

Reviewer: I would remove this bit, as the intro to DiD describes this in detail. Directly starting to talk about the parallel trends assumption helps keep the introduction more concise!

The fundamental identification assumption behind these methods is the parallel trends assumption (also referred to as the common trends assumption). This assumption entails that, in the absence of treatment, the two groups would have followed similar (i.e., parallel) trends in the outcome. Of course, we do not observe what would have happened had treatment not been implemented, so this assumption is not fully empirically verifiable. However, researchers often present evidence that the groups followed parallel trends _before_ the treatment was introduced to lend credibility to the DiD or event study design they are using.

## Testing for pre-trends

> The trends prior to the treatment introduction are often referred to as ‘pre-trends’. Testing for the statistical significance of differences in pre-trends between the two groups is one popular way of checking the validity of the parallel trends assumption. If we do not observe any statistically significant difference in these pre-trends, we tentatively conclude that the parallel trends assumption holds. Conversely, if significant differences are present, we may have to re-consider the validity of our design or use a version of DiD that does not require the assumption to hold (see the 'Recommendations' section below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Testing for the statistical significance of differences in pre-trends between groups, i.e. the trends prior to the treatment introduction, is one popular way of checking the validity of the parallel trends assumption. If we do not observe any statistically significant difference in these pre-trends, we tentatively conclude that the parallel trends assumption holds. Conversely, if significant differences are present, we may have to re-consider the validity of our design or use a version of DiD that does not require the assumption to hold (see the 'Recommendations' section below).

```

> In practice, in a DiD or event study setting, we will often have multiple pre- and post-treatment periods. For example, we might measure the outcome 4 years before and 4 years after the treatment is implemented. A test for pre-trends would then imply testing for differences between the treatment and control groups in each of the 4 years before the treatment. We could then use two criteria for assessing the validity of the parallel trends assumption: individual or joint significance of the coefficients. The former would imply that we consider the assumption valid if and only if none of the 4 differences is statistically significant. The latter would mean that we consider the assumption valid if the 4 differences are not jointly statistically significant. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, in a DiD or event study setting, we will often have multiple pre- and post-treatment periods. For example, we might measure the outcome 4 years before and 4 years after the treatment is implemented. A test for pre-trends would then imply testing for differences between the treatment and control groups in each of the 4 years before the treatment. We could then use two criteria for assessing the validity of the parallel trends assumption: 
1. *Individual significance of the coefficients:* we consider the assumption valid if and only if none of the 4 differences is statistically significant.
2. *Joint significance of the coefficients:* We consider the assumption valid if the 4 differences are not jointly statistically significant. 

```

> [He and Wang (2017)](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20160079) study the effect of the allocation of so-called college graduate village officials (CGVOs) to rural communities in China on poverty alleviation. CGVOs are assigned bureaucratic roles in villages to help local governments successfully implement the central government’s anti-poverty policies. The idea behind the policy is that college graduates should be more able and efficient administrators than rural government leaders. They use a staggered difference-in-differences design, exploiting the fact that CGVOs were allocated to villages in a [staggered](/staggered-did) (gradual) fashion. For example, village A might have been assigned a CGVO in 2001, village B in 2004, and village C in 2005. They test for the parallel trends assumption by testing for the statistical significance of between-group differences in their four outcomes of interest for each of the pre-treatment periods they have in their sample: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% example %}}
[He and Wang (2017)](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20160079) study the effect of the allocation of so-called college graduate village officials (CGVOs) to rural communities in China on poverty alleviation. CGVOs are assigned bureaucratic roles in villages to help local governments successfully implement the central government’s anti-poverty policies. The idea behind the policy is that college graduates should be more able and efficient administrators than rural government leaders. They use a staggered difference-in-differences design, exploiting the fact that CGVOs were allocated to villages in a [staggered](/staggered-did) (gradual) fashion. For example, village A might have been assigned a CGVO in 2001, village B in 2004, and village C in 2005. They test for the parallel trends assumption by testing for the statistical significance of between-group differences in their four outcomes of interest for each of the pre-treatment periods they have in their sample: 
{{% /example %}}

```

<p align = "center">
<img src = "../images/pretest.png" width=600">
</p>

They also present graphical evidence of the validity of their common trends assumption, shown in this event study plot:

<p align = "center">
<img src = "../images/pretrends1.png" width=600">
</p>

## Problems with common tests for pre-trends

> Significance tests and event study plots are straightforward and intuitive ways of testing for the validity of the parallel trends assumption. However, they are subject to some notable shortcomings, which are discussed in detail by [Roth (2022)](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aeri.20210236). We look at the most important insights from this paper below. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Significance tests and event study plots are straightforward and intuitive ways of testing for the validity of the parallel trends assumption. However, they are subject to some notable shortcomings, which are discussed in detail by [Roth (2022)](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aeri.20210236). We look at two of the most important shortcomings below: *Low statistical power* and *Exacerbation of bias*

```

### Low statistical power

> The first major problem with the conventional tests for pre-trends is that they often have low [statistical power](https://tilburgsciencehub.com/topics/analyze/causal-inference/introduction/statistical-power/). Statistical power is a measure of how likely we are to find a statistically significant effect (or difference) if there is one, given the characteristics of our design, such as sample size, the significance level, and the minimum effect size we want to be able to detect. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first major problem with the conventional tests for pre-trends is that they often have low [statistical power](/statistical-power). Statistical power is a measure of how likely we are to find a statistically significant effect (or difference) if there is one, given the characteristics of our design, such as sample size, the significance level, and the minimum effect size we want to be able to detect. 

```

Low statistical power essentially means that we will not detect statistically significant differences in pre-trends unless they are very large. This is problematic because small or medium differences can also pose a threat to the parallel trends assumption and thus to reliable causal inference in DiD and event study settings. 

{{% tip %}}

> Read more about statistical power and the problems associated with low statistical power [here](https://tilburgsciencehub.com/topics/analyze/causal-inference/introduction/statistical-power/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read more about statistical power and the problems associated with low statistical power [here](/statistical-power). 

```

{{% /tip %}}

> Going back to the He and Wang (2017) paper, let’s imagine that there are differences in trends between the treated and untreated villages before the treatment is introduced. For example, the trend in poor housing is already decreasing in the treated villages, while in untreated ones it is not. However, the test we use to check for parallel trends has lower power and we are unable to detect this difference, so we assume that the parallel trends assumption holds and proceed to estimate the treatment effect. We find that the difference in differences is negative, that is, the treatment has apparently decreased the share of poor housing. Since the trend before the treatment was introduced was already like this, we cannot attribute this observed difference to the treatment, but we do not know this because low statistical power impedes the detection of the pre-treatment difference in trends. In this way, using low-powered pre-trend tests to verify the parallel trends assumption can lead to mistaken causal inference. 

Reviewer: maybe this can be shortened a bit to make the article more concise in general?

> Low statistical power is not a problem exclusive to tests for pre-trends: it also often occurs with the estimation of the treatment effects of interest. However, it can occur more frequently with pre-trend tests due to lower sample sizes (if we are looking at each pre-treatment period separately) and higher levels of noise in the outcome before treatment is implemented. In any case, it is always useful to assess the power our pre-trends test has to evaluate its capacity to detect significant differences in pre-trends and establish the credibility of the parallel trends assumption. 

Reviewer: this should be shortened as well, maybe stick to the main point? For example, shorten to:

Low statistical power is especially likely to happen in pre-trend tests due to a smaller sample size and higher levels of noise in the outcome before the treatment is implement. It is useful to assess the power to evaluate the capacity of our pre-trend tests.

> 

Reviewer: Add small header here with something like "Example in R" to divide the section into text background and code example.

> We can do this using the _pretrends_ package in R. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can do this using the `pretrends` package in R. 

```

We first install and load the package into R using the code below.

> ```R
> #install and load the pretrends package
> install.packages("remotes")
> remotes::install_github("jonathandroth/pretrends")
> library(pretrends)
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% codeblock %}}
```R
#install and load the pretrends package
install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("jonathandroth/pretrends")
library(pretrends)
```
{{% /codeblock %}}

```

> The package contains some data from He and Wang's (2017) paper, which we discussed above. In this example, we will work with these data, but the functions of the _pretrends_ package can be easily applied to any other DiD or event study estimation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The package contains some data from He and Wang's (2017) paper, which we discussed above. In this example, we will work with these data, but the functions of the `pretrends` package can be easily applied to any other DiD or event study estimation.

```
